# Lesson 5 - For loops

## Introduction
[In the previous lesson](https://github.com/qitianshi/tyros-resources/tree/main/Lesson%204), we learnt about how to use while loops to repeat a particular set of steps.

However, while loops are not the only type of loops available at our disposal! Sometimes, we do want computers to repeatedly do things over and over again, but we want them to stop after some number of times! We are actually able to achieve this by usin what we will be looking at in today's lesson: for loops.

## The `for` loop
If you recall from our previous lesson, a while loop repeats a set of instructions for as long as a condition is true. However, a for loop is different! A for loop repeats a set of instructions a specified number of times!

This is what a basic for loop looks like. Just like with previous concepts we have learnt (like the while loop), the indentation is especially important.

```python
for SOME_VARIABLE in range(START, END, STEP):
    print("Looped")
```

A question we have to first ask ourselves is: is there a condition here? The answer is: yes! There actually is a condition. It is just presented to us as the `range` function. (More on that later...) So long as this condition is fulfilled, the contents of the loop (`print("Looped")`) will be performed. You might also notice that we introduce `SOME_VARIABLE` here. The purpose of that is because when we use the `range()` function, we actually assign a value to `SOME_VARIABLE`. Without it, our for loop would not work!

Before we dive into the specifics, let us first look at an example of how the for loop is used!

Do you remember the game show *The Price is Right* from last time?

> On the game show *The Price is Right*, contestants guess the prices of various items. The winner is the one whose guess is the closest to the actual price, without going over. Let's try writing some code that continually accepts guesses, until one goes over.
>
> ```
> actual_price = 50
> guess = 0
> 
> while guess <= actual_price:
>     guess = float(input("What's your guess? "))
> 
> print("You've gone over!")
> ```

Well, one contestant figured out a loophole, and guessed 1, 2, 3... all the way until the actual price. And our poor game master could not do anything. It wasn't against the rules!

Now, instead of guessing until they reach the actual price, we give them a fixed number of guesses. Let's try writinsome code that accepts guesses for a fixed number of times, say 10 times.

```python
actual_price = 50

for i in range(0, 10):
    guess = float(input("What's your guess? "))
    
    if guess == actual_price:
        print("You got it!)
        break    # terminate loop after correct guess
        
    elif guess < actual_price:
        print("Too low...)
    
    else:
        print("Too high...")
```

Try running this code and type in different guesses! You'll see that if you keep getting wrong guesses, you will only get ten tries in total. (But if you get the correct guess, then you wouldn't need the additional tries either, so you just... finish.)

### `range()`
You might have guessed that we control the number of times we repeat the for loop above using the `range()` function, and you are right! 

To use the `range()` function, we do something like this:

```python
range(START, STOP[, STEP])
```

We see that the `range()` function takes in three arguments. To put it simply, we can provide it with three values. Out of the three, `START` and `STEP` are optional, whereas `STOP` is mandatory.

First, `START` is the starting position of the sequence, or the number we start with. *The default value is `0` if not specified*.

Next, `STOP` specifies where we stop. This tells the `range()` function to generate numbers up to this number. A key thing to note is that *the `range()` function never includes `STOP` in its result*.

Lastly, `STEP` specifies the increment value, or the "step size" between consecutive numbers. Each next number in the sequence is generated by adding the value of `STEP` to the previous number. *The default value is `1` if not specified*. This also *cannot be 0*.

For example, if we have `range(0, 6, 1)`, `START = 0`, `STOP = 6`, `STEP = 1`.

#### Using `range()`

Try running this code:

```python
for i in range(6):
    print(i)
```

```
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
```

What `range()` does is it produces a sequence of integers that start from `START` and end at `STOP - 1`. From the above example, we see that `range(6)` will give us numbers from 0 to 5. However, in order to access these numbers, we have to use the for loop! The variable `i` takes on each of the numbers in our sequence, and after we output `i`, we make `i` the next value provided by `range()`.

This is also the mechanism behind using the `range()` function for the for loop! Each time our variable `i` takes on a new value, the contents of the loop run once. So, our loop will run however many times our variable `i` takes on a new value, and that depends on the number of integers generated by `range()`!

We can also provide `range()` with both the `START` and `STOP` values:

```python
# Numbers from 10 to 15
# start = 10
# stop = 16
for i in range(10, 16):
    print(i)
```

```
> 10
> 11
> 12
> 13
> 14
> 15
```

Here, `STEP` is not provided, and thus it takes on the value of `1`. A key thing to note here is that if `STOP < START`, then our `range()` here would not work, because `STEP` is positive (basically, you can't keep adding to a number to make it smaller).

We can also provide `STEP` too:

```python

# Numbers from 10 to 15
# start = 10
# stop = 50
# step = 5
for i in range(10, 50, 5):
    print(i)
```

```
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
```

## More examples

Let's go through a few more for loop examples!
